# ECON 4008 Crime

Gary Becker, "Crime and Punishment: An Economic Approach"

Could save money by reduce the police (cut wages) and increase the punishment

Cost of punishing people would be same or lower but we could save the money on detection.

Total Cost = Num of Crimes (goes down) times Punishment/Detection cost for each crime (goes up)

Marginal cost of deterring another crime could be either positive or negative.

From a criminal's perspective, cost of crime = expected punishment = $Pr(being \ caught)\times severity$


|Object|Changes|
|---|---|
|Social harm of each crime (social value - private benefit of the criminal)| |
|Cost of trial and punishment| |
|Hiring more police officers to increase the detection rate| $1,000\rightarrow 700$ | 
|Better deterence| $1,000\rightarrow 700$ |

What is the marginal cost of deterence?

What is the extra cost of punishment and detection when the detection rate changes from 15% to 20% ?

1. Changes in social harm

$$
(1000-700)\times 10,000 = 3,000,000
$$

2. Changes in cost of tring and punishing

$$
(1,000 \times 15\% - 700 \times 20\%)\times 100,000=1,000,000
$$

3. Changes in the cost of detection

It is equal to the cost of hiring more police officers, we denote by $c$

Cost of more deterence = 1+2+3, here 1+2 is negative, the 3 is positive


- If $c > 4,000,000$

Cost of deterence is positive

- If $c < 4,000,000$

Cost of deterence is negative

## Exercise

Q: What is the increases in detection rate only decrease the number of crimes from $1,000$ to $900$?

1. Changes in social harm

$$
(1000-700)\times 10,000 = 3,000,000
$$


2. Changes in trialing and punishing

3. What is the city's WTP for more police officers?




Think about increasing e, or equivalently, spending more on detection.

$N$ will go down, $p(e)$ will go up, $c$ will go up.

Supply of crimes is inelastic --- $N$ does not change too much when you increase the detection rate.

Even when detection is cheap, more detection is only efficient if the supply of crimes is elastic.


